Wireshark
Explain like you’re 7
(letter) flying on the network and lets you read who sent it, who received it, and what type it is.

Key features (child-simple)

Capture real network packets live.

Inspect packet content (source/destination, protocol, data).

Apply filters to focus on specific traffic (only HTTP, only traffic to a host, etc.).

Statistics: see conversation lists, protocol distributions, IO graphs.

How to perform basic experiments on the PC (steps)

Install Wireshark:

Download from wireshark.org and install (Windows, macOS, Linux).

Start Wireshark and choose the network interface (Wi-Fi or Ethernet) to capture on.

Packet Capture:

Click the interface and then the blue shark-fin button to start capturing.

Let it run for a little while while you do some network activity (open a web page, ping, etc.).

Click the red square to stop.

Viewing captured traffic:

Top pane: list of packets (time, source, dest, protocol, info).

Middle pane: decoded protocol layers of selected packet.

Bottom pane: raw bytes.

Analysis & Statistics:

Statistics → Protocol Hierarchy (shows % by protocol).

Statistics → Conversations (who talked to whom).

Statistics → IO Graphs (plot traffic over time).

Filters:

Capture filter (before capture) limits what is captured. Example: port 80 or host 192.168.1.5.

Display filter (after capture) shows only packets you want. Example:

Show only HTTP: http

Show only TCP to a host: tcp && ip.dst == 192.168.1.10

Show only packets from a host: ip.src == 192.168.1.5

Useful filter examples

ip.addr == 192.168.1.10 — packets where that IP is source or dest

tcp.port == 80 — packets using TCP port 80

icmp — only ping packets

http — only HTTP requests/responses

Short exam theory (write this)

Wireshark is a network packet analyzer that captures and displays network traffic in real time. It helps in troubleshooting,
protocol analysis, and security investigation by decoding packet contents and offering powerful filters and statistics to examine network behavior.
